How detractors view Sonics return, NBA expansion -- analysis
Tim Booth, Seattle Times (republished in The Spokesman-Review)

For all the excitement and buzz that has been generated about
the possibility of NBA expansion, it remains just that -- a
possibility. While most of the public conversation has focused
on the potential return of the Seattle SuperSonics, there is a
world in which all the talk falls flat and the NBA eventually
decides not to expand. That outcome seems blasphemous at the
moment, and it is the kind of decision that could poison fans
in the Seattle market to the point where any chance of the
league returning becomes unlikely. But there are viable points
against expansion that are worth taking seriously.

Prominent voices in the NBA space -- Bill Simmons, former
All-Star Tracy McGrady, and others -- have pumped the brakes on
expansion, citing either owners who are not on board or concern
about the dilution of talent if two more teams are added.
Commissioner Adam Silver himself cautioned about expansion at
the Board of Governors meeting when the league formally
announced plans to engage with potential ownership groups in
Seattle and Las Vegas:

  "The league is in such a strong position right now, and
  there is such enormous belief in the future prospects of
  this league, that for the 30 teams, there was nobody in the
  room saying 'I really want to expand right now because I
  could really use the money.' It's very much a strategic
  decision for this league. Part of the issue when you're
  selling equity is you have to make predictions about future
  value. Virtually everyone in the room said 'I'm a buyer, I'm
  not a seller.' The real reason to ultimately expand is if
  you see strategic benefit. That's why we're particularly
  focused on Las Vegas and Seattle."

With that in mind, several factors could lead to the opposite
outcome NBA fans are hoping for.

Nobody cares about history

There are 30 teams in the NBA. Only 10 current principal owners
were in charge of their respective teams the last time the
league included the SuperSonics -- including the owners of the
Thunder, who moved the franchise out of Seattle. There has long
been a feeling that expansion would be an opportunity to right
the wrong from what happened nearly 20 years ago, and there is
sentiment within the league office for that. But this decision
is not made by the league office or by Silver. It is made by
owners, and two-thirds of the league has no sentimentality
toward Seattle. They are business people first. Whatever the
decision ends up being will come down to whether the dollars
make sense.

The money isn't there

The expansion fee is set by the current owners with input from
the league office about what is expected to be offered in the
open marketplace. Numbers have been floated between seven and
ten billion dollars, with most observers believing the target
area is somewhere north of eight billion. If owners are dead
set on ten billion for an expansion fee and an ownership group
in Seattle or Las Vegas cannot get there, expansion does not
happen.

Owners don't want to split the pot

When the NBA signed its new seventy-seven-billion-dollar media
rights deal nearly two years ago, it became a massive windfall
for each franchise. The media rights deals are split thirty
ways. This season each team receives 142.56 million dollars,
and that cut is only supposed to grow through the remainder of
the deal. With two more mouths to feed, the math changes. The
league could cap the share of media revenue new expansion
teams receive in their first couple of seasons. But if Seattle
and Las Vegas were to get a full share starting in 2028-29,
each team's media revenue in that season would drop by nearly
eleven million dollars relative to the non-expansion case --
from 174.66 million to 163.74 million, per Sports Business
Journal. Extrapolated over the remaining life of the media
deal, the 30 current teams would have to be willing to part
with roughly one hundred million dollars in media rights
payments through the 2035-36 season. A lump-sum expansion fee
of five hundred million per team up front might not be enough
to offset those future losses for some owners.

Not enough talent in the league

Are there enough basketball players to fill two more rosters?
Yes. Are there players currently sitting on NBA benches who
could thrive with a bigger role? Yes. But are there enough
stars, enough franchise centerpieces, to support two additional
competitive teams? The current evidence suggests no. The gulf
in this year's standings between teams actively competing for
playoff spots and teams so devoid of talent that tanking became
the best option illustrates the problem. In almost all cases,
the tanking teams either lacked a star player or their star
player was injured. Howard Beck of The Ringer framed the
question after the owners' meetings: if Seattle and Las Vegas
join the NBA family, the expectation should be that they will
not be featuring star-studded, winning rosters right away. That
reality has to be reconciled with before the league decides to
move ahead.
